# Explanation of figures and tables

This help page serves to explain the figures and tables generated by the web application, as it might not be immediately obvious what they're displaying. There will be a small section dedicated to each.

## Plot 1 - Manhattan Plot of Genes

This plot shows the location of each gene (from the expression data) along the genome on the x-axis, and the significance (p-value) for the contribution of the gene to disease heritability on the y-axis. The dashed line indicates the significance threshold, which defaults to a Bonferroni correction threshold of 0.05 (both the correction method and threshold value can be changed above the plot). Blue dots fall below the threshold and indicate genes which are not significant regarding their contribution to disease heritability, green dots fall above the threshold and indicate genes which are significant regarding their contribution to disease heritability. It is also possible to use the cursor to draw a box highlighting genes the user is interested in, and some information about the highlighted genes (gene names, significance value etc.) will be displayed below the plot.

## Plot 2 - Heritability-Specificity

This plot shows the significance (p-value) for each gene (x-axis), plotted against the max ESµ value associated with those same genes (y-axis). The intuition here is that genes that are both highly significant regarding disease heritability and highly specifically expressed (aka the genes located to the upper right in the plot) are the ones driving the cell-type prioritization results and thus the genes which have the highest impact on disease heritability in the cell types where the genes are the most highly specifically expressed. The vertical and horizontal dashed lines correspond to the threshold set for the number of MAGMA genes and ESµ percentile, respectively (as described on the previous help page). Like in Plot 1, it is possible to highlight dots/genes in the plot and see information about the highlighted genes below the plot.

## Plot 3 - Heritability Distribution

**This page is only displayed if a gene set is also given as input.**

The first plot displays the distribution of heritability Z-scores (computed by MAGMA, and which are used to calculate the heritability p-values) for all the genes in the expression data, and should be roughly normally distributed. The locations of the Z-scores associated with the genes in the input gene set are also highlighted.

Then, a p-value for a non-empirical one-sided Mann-Whitney U test is shown, indicating whether the Z-scores for the genes in the gene set are significantly different (positive) from the Z-scores for all other genes in the data.

Then, a p-value for an empirical one-sided Mann-Whitney U test is shown (randomly sampling Z-scores from a number of genes equivalent to the gene set from the background distribution and performing a statistical test - this is done 1,000 times in total), indicating whether the Z-scores for the genes in the gene set are significantly different (positive) from the Z-scores for all other genes in the data.

Lastly, a plot of the distribution of statistical test scores (W-statistic) is shown, with the red and dashed line indicating the significance threshold (0.05) and the green line the statistical test score when using the Z-scores for the genes in the gene set.

## Plot 4 - CELLEX Distribution

**This page is only displayed if a gene set is also given as input.**

This page uses the exact same approach as for **Plot 3 - Heritability Distribution**, except that the CELLEX (ESµ) values are now used instead of the heritability significance p-values.

## Plot 5 - Cell-Type/Tissue Prioritization

This barplot shows the top 50 cell types sorted by their prioritization p-values.

## Plot 6 - Heritability

This barplot shows the top 50 genes sorted by their heritability significance p-values.

## Table 1 - Cell-Type/Tissue Prioritization

This table contains the cell-type prioritization results outputted by CELLECT-MAGMA. It contains information about the names of the utilized GWAS summary statistics data, name of the utilized gene expression dataset, names of cell types, beta values, but most important are the significance p-values in the **P** column.

## Table 2 - Top Genes

This table contains the **top genes** selected using the thresholds for "Number of MAGMA genes" and "Percentile of CELLEX values" (as described on the previous help page). The table contains information about gene names, cell type names, CELLEX (ESµ) values and p-values, as well as percentiles for each of the latter two.

## Table 3 - CELLEX

This table contains the CELLEX ESµ values for each gene across all cell types in the analyzed gene expression data. In the case of the mouse brain data (A. Zeisel et al. 2018) included in this web application, the CELLEX dataset encompasses ESµ values for 15,071 genes across 265 cell types. The first column contains the gene names (in ENSEMBL format), and all other columns contain ESµ values (one cell type per column).

## Table 4 - Heritability

This table contains the disease heritability results calculated by MAGMA. The table contains information about gene names, which chromosome a gene is located on as well as the specific bp location on the chromosome, the number of SNPs associated with each gene, the number of relevant parameters used in the model, the sample size, the gene's Z-score (and other relevant information regarding the score), as well as the p-value calculated from the Z-score.

